---
page_id: genomics
layout: page
title: Tools for modern genomics
description: Developing approaches to make sense of cutting-edge DNA/RNA sequencing data
img: assets/img/rotary-logo-4x3.png
importance: 3
related_publications: false
---

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/rotary-logo-4x1.jpg" title="Logo for a genome assembly pipeline called 'Rotary'" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Logo for <a href="http://github.com/rotary-genomics/rotary/">Rotary</a>, a utility and workflow for assembling genomes with circular DNA elements
</div>

Technology for DNA sequencing has dramatically changed over the past two decades. Now, bacterial genomes can be sequenced
for less than the cost of a smartphone, and DNA and RNA sequencing technology is being applied in an increasing number of
settings around the world. From giving us a new window to study the ecology of Earth's ecosystems to having new tools for
industrial applications in the food and energy sectors, DNA sequencing technology is revolutionizing our ability to
understand and interact with biological systems.

With the rapid progression of DNA sequencing technology comes rapid changes in data analysis needs and data analysis
volumes. Bioinformatics tools written a few years ago can sometimes find themselves obsolete due to the development of new
computational approaches, and increasingly, software engineering approaches are needed to manage the high amounts of
sequencing data that are stored and analyzed by research groups. Higher volumes of data also create new opportunities to
perform meta-analyses of existing DNA data through comparative genomics or environmental surveys. One of the ongoing themes
of my work is to develop new approaches and workflows to analyze modern DNA/RNA sequencing data, with the hope that these
workflows can contribute to making cutting-edge DNA/RNA sequencing data more accessible to the research community in
the long-term.

My work in this research theme is typically driven by my own data analysis needs. To address an interesting research
question, often bioinformatics approaches are needed that don't quite exist yet or are not yet engineered to tackle
high volumes of input data. Over the past several years, I have helped develop semi-automated visualization tools for
'omics data that help make sense of high volumes of underlying sequence information (see figure below for an example).
My current work is to develop a hybrid long- and short-read sequence assembly pipeline for genomes with circular DNA
elements, called <a href="http://github.com/rotary-genomics/rotary/">Rotary</a>, that uses best practices to avoid
common problems that occur around the start point of circular genomes in FastA files. Beyond this, I am also working on
several "big data" projects to either analyze environmental DNA/RNA data from field surveys or to do global biogeography
based on publicly available and archived sequence data. Look forward to sharing the results of these works soon - a
couple are already available online, such as <a href='https://doi.org/10.1038/s41396-020-0725-0'>Tsuji <i>et al.</i>, ISME J, 2020</a>
and <a href='https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07180-y'>Tsuji <i>et al.</i>, Nature, 2024</a>.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/backblast.jpg" title="Example figure generated by BackBLAST for comparative genomics. A phylogenetic tree is mounted to a heatmap that shows which genes are present or absent in each genome." class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Example figure generated by <a href="https://github.com/LeeBergstrand/BackBLAST_Reciprocal_BLAST/tree/develop">BackBLAST</a> for comparative genomics. Final figure version is available in <a href='https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07180-y'>Tsuji <i>et al.</i>, Nature, 2024</a>. (BackBLAST is now stale in development, so I recommend an alternative approach now, such as using the reciprocal best hits module in MMSeqs2, followed by visualization in ggtree.) 
</div>
